docs: tw903-mpp (#3381)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: docs/build-decentralized-apps/machine-payments-protocol.mdx

---
title: 'Machine Payments Protocol (MPP)'

> description: This quickstart walks you through the process of how to implement the Machine Payments Protocol (MPP) on Arbitrum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: This quickstart shows you how to implement the Machine Payments Protocol (MPP) on Arbitrum.
```

author: pete-vielhaber
sme: EmreDincoglu
user_story: As a developer, I want to understand how to implement the Machine Payments Protocol (MPP) on Arbitrum.
content_type: quickstart
displayed_sidebar: buildAppsSidebar
---

This quickstart will guide you through implementing an Arbitrum-specific payment method plugin for the `mppx` library, which implements the Machine Payments Protocol (MPP). MPP defines a generic **challenge → credential → settlement** flow for payments between two parties:

> - **Server**: the merchant/payee (the one wants to get paid)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Server**: the merchant/payee (the one that wants to get paid)
```

- **Client**: the payer (a user or AI agent)

> `mppx` itself is payment-method-agnostic. This plugin provides the methods for settling payments on Arbitrum One or Arbitrum Sepolia using **ERC-20** stablecoins (currently **USDC**) using [EIP-3009](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-3009) `authorization` and almost any **ERC-20** via `permit2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`mppx` itself is payment-method-agnostic. This plugin provides methods for settling payments on Arbitrum One or Arbitrum Sepolia with **ERC-20** stablecoins (currently **USDC**) through [EIP-3009](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-3009) `authorization`, and with almost any **ERC-20** via `permit2`.
```

## Core concepts

The client (payer) never broadcasts a transaction and never pays gas.

1. The merchant requests payment (issues a challenge).
2. The payer signs an EIP-712 typed-data authorization offchain—no gas, no prior onchain approval is needed.
3. The merchant's server submits the signature onchain, completing the fund transfer. The merchant pays for the gas.

> This is exactly the "402 Payment Required"—style flow you'd want for machine/agent commerce: an HTTP request hits a paywalled endpoint, the agent signs a payment authorization, and the server settles it atomically before serving the response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is exactly the "402 Payment Required" flow you'd want for machine/agent commerce: an HTTP request hits a paywalled endpoint, the agent signs a payment authorization, and the server settles it atomically before serving the response.
```

It supports two settlement mechanisms:

| Type          | Onchain mechanism                                   | Supports splits?                                | Need prior approval?                                |
| ------------- | --------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
| authorization | EIP-3009 transferWithAuthorization (native to USDC) | ❌                                              | ❌                                                  |

> | permit2       | Uniswamp's Permit2 permitWitnessTransferFrom        | ✅ (pay multiple recipients in one transaction) | ✅ payer must pre-approve Permit2 on the token once |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| permit2       | Uniswap's Permit2 permitWitnessTransferFrom         | ✅ (pay multiple recipients in one transaction) | ✅ payer must pre-approve Permit2 on the token once |
```

:::warning Other options

> `transaction` and `hash` credential types are stubbed but intentionally not implemented—these have weaker challenge-binding and invite fraud potential.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`transaction` and `hash` credential types are stubbed but intentionally not implemented—these have weaker challenge-binding and carry fraud risk.
```

:::

<ImageZoom src="/img/mpp.png" className="img-600px" alt="MPP Flow">
  MPP Flow
</ImageZoom>

## What the client does

`charge()` returns a `Method.toClient` handler. In `createCredential`:

1. Validates the challenge’s `chainId` is supported and unexpired.
2. Checks the payer’s token balance onchain (`balanceOf`).
3. Branches on `credentialTypes`:

- **permit2** (or undefined): builds permitted/`transferDetails` arrays (handling splits, with the primary recipient pushed to the front), derives the nonce from a challenge hash, and signs the Permit2 witness typed-data.

<VanillaAdmonition type="info" title="permit2 splits">
  The sum of the amounts in the split must be strictly lower than the total amount for the transaction. So if the total transaction is 10,000 and splits have two recipients that will receive 2,000 and 3,000—the main recipient will receive 5,000.
</VanillaAdmonition>

> - **authorization**: derives nonce = `keccak256(challenge.id`, `challenge.realm`) for challenge-binding (anti-replay), looks up the token’s EIP-712 domain from the local erc3009Tokens registry (not an onchain query), and signs the `TransferWithAuthorization` struct.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **authorization**: derives nonce = `keccak256(challenge.id, challenge.realm)` for challenge-binding (anti-replay), looks up the token's EIP-712 domain from the local erc3009Tokens registry (not an onchain query), and signs the `TransferWithAuthorization` struct.
```

## How to implement it — server (merchant) side

`mppx` has an Express adapter:

```typescript
import express from 'express';
import { Mppx } from 'mppx/express';
import { privateKeyToAccount } from 'viem/accounts';
import { charge } from '@arbitrum/mpp/server';
import * as defaults from '@arbitrum/mpp/default';

const account = privateKeyToAccount(process.env.SERVER_PRIVATE_KEY as `0x${string}`);
const app = express();

const mppx = Mppx.create({
  methods: [
    charge({
      recipient: account.address, // where funds land
      currency: defaults.TOKEN_CONTRACTS.USDC_ARBITRUM_SEPOLIA, // which token
      methodDetails: { chainId: 421614, decimals: 6 },
      account, // pays gas to settle
    }),
  ],
  secretKey: process.env.SERVER_PRIVATE_KEY,
});

// Gate an endpoint behind a charge:
app.get(
  '/authorization',
  mppx.charge({
    amount: '1000', // raw units: 1000 = 0.001 USDC (6 decimals)
    description: 'My favorite food',
    methodDetails: { chainId: 421614, credentialTypes: ['authorization'] },
  }),
  (req, res) => res.json({ data: 'authorization worked!' }), // only runs after payment settles
);

app.listen(3000);
```

> - **Set credentialTypes**: ['permit2'] instead to use Permit2, and add a splits: [...] array to pay multiple recipients in one transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Set `credentialTypes` to `['permit2']` to use Permit2 instead, and add a `splits: [...]` array to pay multiple recipients in one transaction.
```

> - ⚠️ Amount uses raw token units — human-readable decimal conversion isn't supported yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ⚠️ `amount` uses raw token units — human-readable decimal conversion isn't supported yet.
```

> - ⚠️ Amount is in raw token units, not human-readable—human-readable decimals aren’t supported yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ⚠️ Amount uses raw token units — human-readable decimal conversion isn't supported yet.
```

## How to implement it - client (payer) side

```typescript
import { Mppx } from 'mppx/client';
import { privateKeyToAccount } from 'viem/accounts';
import { charge } from '@arbitrum/mpp/client';

const account = privateKeyToAccount(process.env.CLIENT_PRIVATE_KEY as `0x${string}`);

const mppx = Mppx.create({
  methods: [charge({ account, chainId: 421614 })],
});

// mppx intercepts the 402, signs the challenge, retries automatically:
const response = await mppx.fetch('http://localhost:3000/authorization');
const data = await response.json();
console.log(`Response: ${data}`); // Payment response ('authorization worked!')
const receipt = response.headers.get('payment-receipt'); // base64-encoded mppx Receipt
console.log(Buffer.from(receipt!, 'base64').toString('binary')); // Transaction information including hash
```

## Run the bundled example locally

```shell
pnpm install

# .env (copy from .env.example)
CLIENT_PRIVATE_KEY=0x...   # this wallet needs USDC on Arbitrum Sepolia
SERVER_PRIVATE_KEY=0x...   # this wallet needs ETH (gas) on Arbitrum Sepolia

# Terminal 1

> npm run server   # tsx test/server  → listens on :3000

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pnpm run server   # tsx test/server  → listens on :3000
```

# Terminal 2

> npm run client   # tsx test/client  → hits /authorization, signs, settles

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pnpm run client   # tsx test/client  → hits /authorization, signs, settles
```

```

> #### Funding requirements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Funding requirements
```

- Server needs **ETH** on the chain (it pays gas to submit the settlement transaction).
- Client needs **USDC** on the same chain (the funds being pulled).
- For Permit2, the client must first approve the Permit2 contract (`0x000000000022D473030F116dDEE9F6B43aC78BA3`) as a spender on the **USDC** token—Permit2 can’t move tokens it hasn’t been allowed to.

### Current limitations

> - Only **USDC** on Arbitrum One/Sepolia is registered. Adding a token = adding its address + EIP-712 name/version/chainId there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Only **USDC** on Arbitrum One/Sepolia is registered. To add a token, register its address and EIP-712 name/version/chainId.
```

> - amount is raw units only—no human-readable decimal conversion yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `amount` is raw units only—no human-readable decimal conversion yet.
```

> - For authorization, the `validBefore` expiry is trusted from the server’s challenge; a far-future expiry theoretically widens the window in which an unsubmitted authorization could be settled late. (**Note**: the EIP-3009 nonce is challenge-bound—keccak256(id, realm) — and single-use onchain, so a literal replay of an already-settled authorization is blocked once the nonce is consumed.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For authorization, the `validBefore` expiry is trusted from the server's challenge; a far-future expiry theoretically widens the window in which an unsubmitted authorization could be settled late. (**Note**: the EIP-3009 nonce is challenge-bound—`keccak256(id, realm)`—and single-use onchain, so a literal replay of an already-settled authorization is blocked once the nonce is consumed.)
```

> - transaction and hash credential types are intentionally unimplemented (weak challenge-binding).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `transaction` and `hash` credential types are intentionally unimplemented (weak challenge-binding).
```

---
title: 'Machine Payments Protocol (MPP)'
description: This quickstart walks you through the process of how to implement the Machine Payments Protocol (MPP) on Arbitrum.
author: pete-vielhaber
sme: EmreDincoglu
user_story: As a developer, I want to understand how to implement the Machine Payments Protocol (MPP) on Arbitrum.
content_type: quickstart
displayed_sidebar: buildAppsSidebar
---

This quickstart will guide you through implementing an Arbitrum-specific payment method plugin for the `mppx` library, which implements the Machine Payments Protocol (MPP). MPP defines a generic **challenge → credential → settlement** flow for payments between two parties:

- **Server**: the merchant/payee (the one wants to get paid)
- **Client**: the payer (a user or AI agent)

> `mppx` itself is payment-method-agnostic. This plugin provides the methods for settling payments on Arbitrum One or Arbitrum Sepolia using **ERC-20** stablecoins (currently **USDC**).

Reviewer 2: Technically true but only for one of the challenge binding types using EIP 3009, otherwise almost all ERC20s can be used via permit2. Just better for marketing that almost all tokens can be used then just one

    amount: '1000', // raw units: 1000 = 0.001 USDC (6 decimals)
    description: 'My favorite food',
    methodDetails: { chainId: 421614, credentialTypes: ['authorization'] },
  }),
  (req, res) => res.json({ data: 'authorization worked!' }), // only runs after payment settles
);

app.listen(3000);
```

- **Set credentialTypes**: ['permit2'] instead to use Permit2, and add a splits: [...] array to pay multiple recipients in one transaction.
- ⚠️ Amount is in raw token units, not human-readable—human-readable decimals aren’t supported yet.

## How to implement it - client (payer) side

```typescript
import { Mppx } from 'mppx/client';
import { privateKeyToAccount } from 'viem/accounts';
import { charge } from '@arbitrum/mpp/client';

const account = privateKeyToAccount(process.env.CLIENT_PRIVATE_KEY as `0x${string}`);

const mppx = Mppx.create({
  methods: [charge({ account, chainId: 421614 })],
});

// mppx intercepts the 402, signs the challenge, retries automatically:
const response = await mppx.fetch('http://localhost:3000/authorization');
const data = await response.json();

const receipt = response.headers.get('payment-receipt'); // base64-encoded mppx Receipt

> console.log(Buffer.from(receipt!, 'base64').toString('binary'));

Reviewer 2: data contains the response, ("authorization works!") and the headers contain more info such as the onchain transaction hash
```suggestion
const data = await response.json();
console.log(`Response: ${data}`) // Payment response ('authorization worked!')
const receipt = response.headers.get('payment-receipt'); // base64-encoded mppx Receipt
console.log(Buffer.from(receipt!, 'base64').toString('binary')); // Transaction information including hash
```

```

## Run the bundled example locally

```shell
pnpm install

# .env (copy from .env.example)
CLIENT_PRIVATE_KEY=0x...   # this wallet needs USDC on Arbitrum Sepolia
SERVER_PRIVATE_KEY=0x...   # this wallet needs ETH (gas) on Arbitrum Sepolia

# Terminal 1
npm run server   # tsx test/server  → listens on :3000

# Terminal 2
npm run client   # tsx test/client  → hits /authorization, signs, settles
```

#### Funding requirements

- Server needs **ETH** on the chain (it pays gas to submit the settlement transaction).
- Client needs **USDC** on the same chain (the funds being pulled).
- For Permit2, the client must first approve the Permit2 contract (`0x000000000022D473030F116dDEE9F6B43aC78BA3`) as a spender on the **USDC** token—Permit2 can’t move tokens it hasn’t been allowed to.

> 

Reviewer 2: i'm not sure where to put this little note but if you use permit2 splits, the sum of the amounts in the splits category must be strictly lower than the total amount for the transaction, so if the total amount is 10,000 and splits has two recipients that will receive 2,000 and 3,000, The main recipient will receive 5,000

Author: I'll find a good place

## Other useful commands

```shell
npm test          # vitest run (includes anvil-fork e2e tests under test/e2e)
npm run build     # rm -rf dist && tsc → dist/  (clean publishable build)
npm run lint      # eslint --fix
npm run format    # prettier --write
```

> E2E tests fork a live network via @viem/anvil (set FORK_URL in .env) so they exercise the real USDC and Permit2 contracts without spending real funds.

Reviewer 2: This section is irrelevant to id say 99% of the public, especially for a quickstart. unless they want to run the E2E tests locally or edit the code

Author: Will remove 👍
